Richard Bowden is Professor of Computer Vision and Machine Learning at the University of Surrey where he leads the Cognitive Vision Group within CVSSP and is Associate Dean for postgraduate research within his faculty.  His research centres on the use of computer vision to locate, track, understand and learn from humans. He has held over 40 research grants from UK, EU funding bodies as well as industrial funded projects. These projects cover areas such as cognitive robotics and vision, sign and gesture recognition, lip-reading and nonverbal communication as well as many fundamental topics to computer vision such as tracking and detection. His research has been recognised by prizes, plenary talks and media/press coverage including the Sullivan thesis prize in 2000 and many best paper awards.

To date, he has published over 200 peer reviewed publications and has served as either program committee member or area chair for ICCV, CVPR, ECCV, BMVA, FG and ICPR in addition to numerous international workshops and conferences. He is an Associate Editor for the journals Image and Vision Computing and IEEE Trans Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (the top journal in his field). He was awarded a Royal Society Leverhulme Trust Senior Research Fellowship in 2013 and is a member of the RS international exchanges committee. He was a member of the British Machine Vision Association (BMVA) executive committee and a company director for seven years. He is a member of the BMVA, a senior member of the IEEE and a Fellow of the Higher Education Academy. He was awarded a prestigious Fellowship of the International Association of Pattern Recognition in 2016.